YouTube, it's Chris. Welcome back to the
channel. In this video, I'd like to talk
to you about the different configs and
the latency impact with FPS, capping
your FPS with different methods, reflex,
G-Sync, VSYNC, and Frame Gen. Now, these
tests were done with frame view and also
my external latency tool to confirm the
results. But to make it simple, I'll
only be showing you the frame view
results and only showing you the results
of the external tool with the G-Sync
tests and refresh rate tests as frame
view can't show those. Now, apologies in
advance. This guide is going to mainly
be with in regarding to Nvidia cards. I
did once own a 6TN00 XT and did some
latency tests quite a long time ago.
though my experience in the past has
been horrible with AMD cards. So, I'm I
apologize in advance that this is only
going to be sort of an Nvidia guide.
Let's first discuss Reflex. Reflex is
great. It works best when it's built
into a game. Generally speaking, you
should always have Nvidia Reflex on,
especially when GPU bound. It does lower
your latency quite a bit, especially if
you're not capping your FPS to stay
under being completely GPU bound. And
we'll talk about that again later.
Staying under 97% GPU usage is a huge
deal. Reflex kind of takes that headache
out of it, but generally speaking,
immut GPU bound and then plus boost if
you're CPUbound. So, say you had low GPU
usage in a game, you want plus boost. It
can still lower latency there, but say
you're completely GPU bound, generally
speaking, you'd want it on. Side note, I
have noticed sometimes on plus boost can
ruin your 1% lows a little bit, but
that's a discussion for another day. Low
latency mode in the driver isn't
actually reflex. We could force it on
here, which would actually force maximum
pre-rendered frames to one. This is a
good thing, especially for latency, if
especially if the game engine doesn't do
that. And then also we can force ultra
which is really useful if a game doesn't
have reflex built in it and we want to
use G-Sync and VSSync and have the
perfect cap set for us. So generally
speaking it's not a bad thing just
leaving this at ultra cuz it'll also
force one and cap for us if we do decide
to use VSYNC and G-Sync. Reflex built
into the game is completely separate.
Some games will only give us the on
option here. And some games will give us
the on and on boost option. Remember,
generally speaking, we want to only use
on if we're say over 95% GPU usage and
then on plus boost if we're under 95%
GPU usage
roughly. There's a few different ways to
cap FPS. And capping your FPS can be
beneficial if completely GPU bound over
95% GPU usage, and we'll talk about that
later. But generally speaking, capping
in games pretty easy on most games. With
this game, there's a slider. If you
wanted to cap in the Nvidia driver, just
go to max frame rate, turn that on. We
could set a value
there. We could use MSI After Burner
with its river tuner to cap as well in
the setup tab. We would simply go down
here and enable the frame rate limiter.
We've got two options. We've got async
and we've got
reflex and then we would set a frame
limit
here and would cap for
us. And those are about the major
options that I'll show you guys today.
These tests are conducted with these
specs. Do not expect identical results
on your hardware. That said, you can
expect similar scaling with my
recommendation. Now, I have done 1080p
and 4K tests. To keep things simple to
show you in more GPUbound case
scenarios, we'll stick with the 4K tests
in regards to reflex and capping. Max
FPS is usually always the lowest input
lag, but that can get a little
complicated if you're actually GPU
bound. Now, we are playing
Counter-Strike 2 here. It's not a very
GPU heavy game, even in 4K, the
4090. So, we are pretty much CPU bound
in this game. And as you can see, even
when CPUbound, in-game reflex, which is
on plus boost, is still lowering our
latency. I suppose the only downside to
capping other than potentially lowering
latency if you're GP bound, it can lower
our 1% lows, as you can see
here. Whereas when we're sort of running
a higher frame rate, our 1% lows are
quite a bit higher. Now, we could use
MSI After Burner with Async, and that
does potentially create a back buffer
and fix our 1% lows. It can be quite a
smooth experience, but unfortunately
adds quite a lot of input lag. So, I
wouldn't recommend MSI After Burner
async cap. Generally speaking, in the
past when I tested things, in-game cap
is always best, but not seeing that
exactly here. It looks like they've
improved Nvidia driver cap quite a bit.
And capping with MSI After Burner Reflex
is pretty good,
too. But you'll see in other games
shortly, and I'll show you that in-game
cap is generally your safe bet. Here's
where things get really interesting,
especially when you're actually
GPUbound. Max frames, our length is
pretty horrible at 16
milliseconds. If we go ahead and cap in
game, so we're not over 95% GPU usage.
Our latency gets lowered a lot. And
that's even without reflex. Go ahead and
enable reflex with a cap. That's usually
best case scenario. But it looks like in
this particular game engine, there's no
plus boost, so it's just on. So, it's
not really doing anything here. But
there are use cases where you can cap
and get a benefit from saying under 95%
GPU usage as well as using reflex. We
can't really see that here. And I think
because there's no on plus boost option
in Marvel Rivals. We wanted to run max
frames but then also have lower latency.
Reflex is a great option. But obviously
because we're so GPU bound here, reflex
isn't doing
everything. So in-game cap is actually
doing a better job. But in this
particular engine when we're GPUbound,
our best bet would be capping and using
in-game
reflex. Now, something gets really funky
here with this game engine. Seems like
any external caps are really, really
bad. Our latency goes quite high here.
And I found the same results on 1080p.
I'll show you exactly the same thing,
but 1080p. So, we're probably not as GP
bound here. So, because of that reason,
as you see our max FPS, the latency
actually isn't bad because we're not
over 95% GPU usage and then we turn
reflex on. It's not really doing
anything. Anyway, what I really wanted
to show you was
1080p. Even with 1080p, the external
caps are really, really bad. So,
generally speaking, safe bet is always
in-game cap and then just turn reflex on
as
well. Call of Duty Black Ops 6 here. As
you can see, max frames, the latency is
quite high because we're GPU bound here.
Even with a 4090, go ahead and cap our
frames, latency gets lowered by quite a
bit. And that's without
reflex. If we run max frames with
reflex, not as GPU bound as Marvel
Rivals, but still just capping in game
is better than just max FPS with reflex.
So once again, generally speaking, best
bet is in-game cap and reflex. Just keep
in mind when doing latency tests,
sometimes you can get a little bit
variable results. So, you're going to
take 02 of a millisecond with a grain of
salt. Generally speaking, this game
doesn't have a problem with external
caps, which is nice. The Nvidia driver
cap and MSI after the burn reflex cap,
but once again, async is sort of a
no-go. Yes, generally speaking, and I'll
show you shortly, it does and can boost
the 1% lows quite a lot by creating a
back buffer, but the latency hit is not
worth it in my opinion. I'll go ahead
and turn async on here just to show you
guys that it can benefit with the 1%
lows keyboard shortcut to make my life
easier. I can toggle it on and off here
with a real quick bench what it can look
like and how to fix the 1% lows
with you can see my 0.1% lows
are 250. Cap it to a frame rate I can
always maintain. I decided to set at 300
this time. Just press the button. We're
kept at 300. Do the bench again. In
theory, our 0.1% lows should be much
higher. There you go. We're getting 290
instead of the 250. So, yes, Async can
boost our 1% lows and 0.1% lows, but
with a really high latency penalty. So,
in my opinion, it's not worth using.
Let's have a look at Cyber Punk now in
4K. As you can see, max frame rate isn't
always best. If I decide to go and cap
my frames where I'm actually at about
under 95% GP usage, our latency comes
down quite a
lot. And one thing I discovered with
this game, the in-game cap isn't very
good. There's something wrong with it.
And the same can be discovered in the
1080p test as well. There's something
wrong with the in-game cap. Now, I've
not usually seen this, so this just must
be this engine. So, I suppose if you
were playing Cyberpunk, you'd probably
want to use something different like
reflex cap or the Nvidia driver cap. I
hope that doesn't confuse you guys, but
nine times out of 10, you're going to be
better off with an in-game cap with
reflex on. That'll be your best bet.
Now, G-Sync is a really hard one to
measure because I can only measure with
an external tool, and there's potential
for every G-Sync module being a little
different. So whether it's a dedicated
G-Sync module or if it's a AMD Freync
module or a VRR module, I'm not entirely
sure what modules they use on how they
work, but some potentially add more
input lag than others. So in this case
on my OLED, it is an AMD Freync module.
And I am getting a little bit higher
input lag with G-Sync on versus G-Sync
off. So that's an increase of 47
milliseconds. So whoever tells you that
G-Sync doesn't have latency, they're
wrong. At the end of the day, the
monitor is syncing the frames to the
display. That requires some kind of
processing power. That's obviously going
to be through the module on the monitor
itself. Now, FYI, just so you guys know,
I have tested this in the past and with
my dedicated G-Sync module monitors,
which was the Nvidia actual module with
my other monitors, I only noticed a.3
millisecond increase. So, potentially
because this isn't a dedicated G-Sync
module, it's a little bit worse. But
yes, this would be the added latency
with G-Sync, I would say, on most
displays that aren't a dedicated G-Sync
module. Not too much of a big deal, but
yes, it does add delay, but this is your
fastest option and lowest input lag
option if you wanted a no tearing
solution. Speaking of no tearing
solution and refresh rates, this is
tested on my 480 Hz ASUS 1440p OLED
monitor. And just like the G-Sync tests,
I did do 950 samples for each test using
a 1000fps Unreal Engine 4 Black and
White Engine with my external tool. As
you can see, the higher our refresh
rate, the lower the input lag, which is
quite nice. There's a point of
diminishing return, especially with
OLED. It seems like 240 is kind of the
sweet spot. So, if you're in the budget
for a decent low input lag monitor, a
240 Hz OLED would be pretty nice. Now, I
did not include 60 Hz test here because
some monitors and OLEDs do not perform
well in 60 Hz and it is not accurate.
So, I just left that out. Now, I need to
talk about an example here. Going back
to the G-Sync thing, right? Let's say
that you do have G-Sync on and you want
to use G-Sync. We do need to take in
mind of the extra input lag from the
G-Sync module, but on top of that, we
also need to take in mind whatever frame
rate that we are getting, the monitor
will be synced to that refresh rate.
Now, it's not a huge deal. It's okay.
G-Sync is your best bet for a screen
tearing free solution, but this at least
needs to be mentioned, and this can only
all be measured externally.
That's why I use my external latency
tool. So, talking about refresh rates,
generally speaking, when you plug in
your monitor for the first time, you'd
want to max this out in here to the
absolute max. And then, obviously, in
the game settings, you'd want to max
that out as well. And with G-Sync,
G-Sync is pretty straightforward.
G-Sync, you can just enable
here. If it's not a dedicated G-Sync
module, you'll see this option here.
Make sure that's selected as well. So,
it all work as for your non-dedicated
G-Sync module. Now, if you would like to
confirm that G-Sync is working, if you
go up to the click on G-Sync there, go
up to the top into display, you can
enable the G-Sync compatible indicator,
which is really nice. So, if you're in a
game and you want to make sure that
G-Sync is actually on, you'll see
something in green on the very top right
saying G-Sync. That's how you'll know
it's on for that specific game. Well,
let's talk about the black dog in the
room, VSync. VSync's got a pretty bad
ramp, and it really should. And I want
to talk to you guys about the latency
impact of vertical sync. So vertical
sync is a software side anti-creen
tearing technology whereas G-Sync is a
monitor side which is controlled by the
module. Now G-Sync is always going to be
faster than VSSync way way way faster
cuz it's monitor side whereas VSYNC is
software side. So we got a couple of
different options. We force it off in
the driver. It doesn't matter what the
game is. We could have it on in the
game. It would still be off because the
driver forces it off.
Now we could use 3D application setting
and that way we can choose whether we
want it off or on in game. Let the game
decide, the game settings
decide. Another option is we could force
it on. And if we force it on in the
driver, even if we have it off in the
game, it'll still be on because the
driver is forcing it on. Generally
speaking, if you want to use VSync, I've
always found this best because you can
actually force triple buffering off in
the driver. Whereas, if you want to set
it to 3D application setting and turn it
on in the game, you don't always know if
the game is using double buffering,
triple buffering. So, generally
speaking, on in driver, off in game is
probably your best bet if you did want
to use vertical sync. So, let's talk
about the input lag with vertical sync.
So, let's talk about VSSync latency in
Counter-Strike 2 as an example. 4K 240.
Max frame rate is obviously going to be
the best. If we enable VSYNC and hit the
max frame rate where we're bouncing off
240, the input lag is really, really
bad. It's because we're bouncing off the
240 refresh rate. Um, that latency has
tripled. We look at that. Pretty pretty
bad. Now, with VSync off, in-game cap,
5.4 4 milliseconds just so we can, you
know, compare. Now, if we keep that cap
and enable VSSync, the latency isn't as
bad, but it's still pretty bad. So,
VSYNC on its own, even if you do cap,
it's still not great. And just as an
example, I wanted to cap to in-game to
225 cuz when you enable G-Sync and
VSync, different things happen. And
we'll talk about that really shortly,
but it's still quite bad. So VSYNC on
its own is really really bad and even
with a cap it's not very
good but when you introduce G-Sync in
the works it gets a little different and
we'll talk about that soon. Here's
Marvel Rivals just to show you similar
scaling. So max frame rate it's
obviously the best result here with no
VSYNC on. Turn VSYNC on and bounce off
the 240 refresh rate. latency is very
very bad. In-game cap on its own without
VSYNC 7 milliseconds and then in-game
cap with VSYNC, we still see the latency
increase. So VSYNC is still bad
regardless of capped or not capped.
Obviously not capped is the worst if
you're hitting the monitor's refresh
rate just to show you
guys. And once again 225 with VSYNC
because when we enable G-Sync different
things happen and like I said we'll talk
about that shortly. Call of Duty Black
Ops 6. Same thing again. Max frames,
latency is good. Max frames with VSync,
latency goes horrible. What's
interesting is it's not as bad on this
engine, which is interesting. But
anyway, that's cap to 237 to compare.
And yeah, the VSYNC still comes up quite
a lot when capped with VSYNC, but not as
bad as just unlimited hitting the
monitor's refresh rate. So, same same
again there. Okay, let's talk about
G-Sync with VSSync cuz sort of magic
happens when you have both of them
together, whereas VSSync on its own is
really, really bad. So, I decided to cap
to 222 just so I could compare and have
G-Sync and VSYNC on without reflex and I
wanted to stay under the reflex cap just
to show you as an example. So, I
hopefully you'll understand soon. So, if
we have the in-game cap, and this tests
are all done with
reflex on, just so you guys know. Okay,
so in-game cap at 222 with G-Sync. The
input lag is 5 milliseconds, which isn't
too bad. Now, keep in mind that does not
include the added G-Sync latency module
because this is sort of software side
tests. So, we do need to keep in mind of
the added G-Sync latency that we'll get
from the module with it on and whatever
small impact on refresh rate because our
frames will be syncing with the hertz.
The whole point of me showing you this
guys
is VSYNC on its own is really really
bad. But when you add G-Sync with VSync,
magic happens because look at the input
lag. It's not going crazy really really
high. And that's because G-Sync is doing
all the work syncing the frames to the
display and VSSync is able to hook into
that whereas VSSync isn't doing all the
work adding the latency. So there is
something magical that happens with
G-Sync and VSYNC and I won't get into
the technical details but G-Sync is
doing the scaling syncing the hertz and
the frames to the monitor and VSYNC can
hook in without added latency. That's
all that needs to be discussed here. So
anyway, when we just don't put a cap on
and we allow G-Sync and VSYNC to do its
thing and in-game reflex or even the
driver to set to ultra if the game
doesn't have reflex in it, it'll
actually cap for us. We don't need to
cap and it's at 225. And that is the
best latency solution you can get for a
complete zero tearing low latency
solution because we could just use
G-Sync on its own in cap. But we'll
still get a screen tear at the bottom of
the screen with G-Sync on its own.
Whereas VSSync will hook in and get rid
of that tear that's at the bottom of the
screen. So yes, for a low latency zero
tearing
solution, reflex on or if a game doesn't
have reflex ultra in the driver with
G-Sync and VSync in the
driver. Let's do Marvel Rivals here. And
as you can see with just G-Sync and a
cap 5.5 milliseconds and then we had
VSync in the work and the latency test
couldn't even pick up the added latency
from VSync cuz it was so minimal cuz
G-Sync's doing all the hard work here
and VSSync just needs to follow suit. So
that's really really nice and exactly
the same results in Call of Duty Black
Ops 6. As you can see here, identical
results there. So why I really showed
you guys it this way is just to show you
that VSYNC on its own is really, really
bad. Uncap there. And then when we cap
there, it's really, really bad. So look,
in-game cap versus a cap with VSYNC is
really, really bad. But when we add
G-Sync into the works,
right? G-Sync does the work. So, it's
not adding the latency. See, look at
that. It's actually really not adding
any latency. Maybe a small small bit,
but VSYNC doesn't need to do much cuz it
just hooks into whatever the G-Sync
module is doing. So, that's kind of
huge. Let's talk about frame gen. Now,
frame generation usually needs to be
enabled um through the game software
side. Um, here's the Call of Duty Black
Ops 6. We can turn on DLSS frame
generation here. And we're lucky enough
that AMD sort of made it open source and
we can use um AMD frame generation as
well if we wanted to. Now, these are
going to introduce fake frames, but also
add a lot of latency. So, I'll show you
guys the results shortly. And for a game
that doesn't have frame gen or the AMD
frame gen built in, you could use
something called lossless scaling to
hook into the game and use frame
generation that way, which is kind of
nice.
But I really don't recommend for a
competitive FPS shooter using frame gen.
And I'll show you why. Looks like let's
look at Marvel Rivals. And I believe
this is Yeah, this is in 1080p. Marvel
Rivals. My max frame rate I get standing
in that spot is 580. And our input lag
is 6.2 milliseconds. When we introduce
Nvidia frame gen in the works, we get a
nice boost in fake frames, mind you, but
it is not boosting our 1% lows. just so
you guys know. And there's actually
quite a lot of added input lag, so it is
not worth it. And in 4K, as you can see,
max frames, we're getting 10.5
milliseconds latency. Now, that could be
lower, obviously, if we capped our frame
rate, which we'll talk about in a little
bit with GPU usage, but just to show you
guys. Um, and then with Nvidia Frame
Gen, it does boost our frames a little
bit, but adds input lag. Now, this isn't
too bad. Marvel Rivals, whatever it does
with Nvidia Frame Gen is is quite good.
This added input lag isn't too bad, but
in other games it's absolutely horrible.
But I still wouldn't play an online
shooter with frame gen. Just just to let
you know, a competitive multiplayer
shooter. I would only use this type of
thing for a single player game. Now, I
apologize. I wasn't able to test AMD
frame generation because my external
latency tool broke just when I was about
to do those tests, but it does add input
lag. It's not worth using unless it's a
single player game. Cyberpunk 2077.
Right. So max frames 7.5 milliseconds
input lag and we're getting 330 fps. We
turn frame generation on and our input
lags comes up quite a lot and it has
doubled our frame rate but it is fake
frames. Now in 4K with just max frame
rate, no frame gen, we're getting about
245 fps and we enable video frame gen.
Our latency comes up quite a lot and we
get a small little boost in about 50
extra FPS.
Here's where it gets interesting though
with a high-end graphics card um where
like the frame gen is broken in the
engine or it's not even boosting your
frames at all. My max frame rate in
1080p uh Black Ops 6 5 milliseconds
input lag. We're getting about 500 FPS.
I turn frame generation on. My input lag
is more than double and it's not even
boosting my frames at all. So that's
kind of interesting. And that hasn't
really changed when I tested it with
Modern Warfare 3 either. So there could
be use case scenarios where frame gen
actually won't do anything for you. I
guess if you've already got a high-end
card. I can't quite explain that one,
but keep that in mind. And yeah, that
input lag is is pretty pretty bad. So in
4K, max FPS 8.1 milliseconds about 300
FPS. Obviously we could get a little bit
lower uh if we did cap, but we'll talk
about that later. Um, and then I go
ahead and enable frame gen. And the
latency is really, really bad. And it's
actually lowered my frame rate here. So,
I just wanted to show you guys as an
example where sometimes frame gen might
not even help if your card's fast enough
or it's buggy with that engine. But
yeah, you'd like your BIOS, Windows, PC,
game fresh, tuned, and optimized, check
out my PC service. All links can be
found in the description below. Just
check link three. All right. So, here's
a quick dirty summary that I want you
guys to take away from this video. the
highest frames under 95% GPU usage with
reflex on and no G-Sync VSYNC will
always be the lowest input lag. You'll
never be able to beat that, right? Okay.
So, also VSYNC on its own is very very
bad. Even if you cap the frame rate to
stay under hitting the monitor's refresh
rate, VSSync on its own is always bad.
VSYNC with G-Sync is great and it's your
best low latency non- tearing solution.
And if you have both with Reflex, it'll
actually cap for you and you don't have
to worry about that, which is very, very
nice. Now, GPU usage really matters for
input lag. And that was the biggest
takeaway from all this, especially for
me. Stay at 95% GPU usage or under for
the lowest input lag. So, the highest
frames isn't necessarily going to be the
best case scenario. It's going to depend
on how fast your card is, what
resolution you're running, what settings
you're running, and what GPU usage you
have. So, if you're playing Counter
Strike and you're playing uncapped, but
you're not over 95% GPU usage, you're
you're great. But if you go play Call of
Duty and you're playing uncapped and
you're over 95% GPU usage, that's not
great. you are actually going to get
lower input lag capping to a lower frame
rate to stay under 95% GPU usage. So if
needed, if your GPU usage is over
95%, cap in game to achieve this until
you hit about 95. That's what I found
the sweet spot to be. Now, Reflex
doesn't do everything because Reflex is
introduced to fix the high GPU usage
issue. Um, but it doesn't do everything
and it doesn't do a perfect job and I
don't think they can do a perfect job
because if they did someone with a
really really bad card that would enable
reflex on it would cap the frame rate
all the way down to like 20 FPS or
something. So, you know, they kind of
just had to find a sweet spot, I guess.
So, sometimes capping to stay under 95%
GPU usage reflex actually won't do
anything for you. Sometimes it won't
even help. But then I have seen some
game engines where it would help capping
as well as having reflex on. So as a
safe bet, your best bet is cap to stay
on the 95% GPU usage if needed. You
might not need a cap depending on how
fast your card is and what your game
settings are and what your resolution
is, etc. And then yeah, so just cap to
95 if needed with reflex
on or on buzzer boost is your best bet.
So speaking of reflex, we want to only
use on if GPU bound. So we would have
high GPU usage. If you got high GPU
usage, just leave reflex on and you'll
actually get a couple more frames um
usually. And then if you um you know, if
you're CPU bound, you want reflex on
plus boost. Um you know, you'd have low
GPU usage there. So, we did see in our
test before uh with Counterstrike um in
1080p with my 4090, I was I was never
GPU bound um and running the max frame
rate versus max frame rate with on plus
boost, it did actually lower our
latency. So, it's doing some magic
there, too. So, just keep that in mind.
Um with the reflex setting, but usually
on plus boost can actually affect your
frame rate a tiny little bit. It's
explained here quite well when should be
when should I be enabling boost just
versus reflex. Enable plus boost can
further reduce latency at the cost of
extra power usage and slightly lower
frame rate. Um this setting is only
recommend for gamers who prioritize the
lowest latency over the highest frame
rate, but that's only going to be useful
for you if you're actually CPUbound. So
just keep that in mind. Anyway, so
in-game cap is usually always best um
for Nvidia card. Second best bet would
be River Tuna Reflex Cap. If you have an
AMD card, uh you can't use Reflex Cap.
It will actually default back to async.
Just keep that in mind. Um and yes,
Cyber Punk was actually broken with the
in-game cap. So, we found a game engine
bug there. So, as a general rule of
thumb, it's not a bad idea if you guys
have an Nvidia card to just install
Frame View and just have a quick check
sometimes just for peace of mind. But
usually in-game cap is always best if
needed. So, hopefully that helps. just
about sums up everything and the
takeaway from this. Um, and hopefully it
didn't confuse you guys too much and
cleared some things up. Enjoy and I'll
talk to you guys later. See you in the
next one.